DOCS-1041: Add basic documentation in line with session management docs for what happens when Viam loses connectivity (#1702)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/program/apis/disconnect.md

Reviewer: can you call this file connectivity insteady? `disconnect` as a title implies this may contain info on how to disconnect

Author: Sure, that makes sense! 😆

Author: done

---
title: "Session Connectivity: Network Disconnection during a Session"
linkTitle: "Network Disconnection"
weight: 20
type: "docs"
description: "How Viam handles losing connection to the internet during a robot session."
tags: ["client", "sdk", "viam-server", "networking", "apis", "robot api", "session"]
---

> A guide to what happens when your robot loses its network connection during a session.

Author: could probably add more at top

### How does `viam-server` work if you lose connectivity during a session?

If you lose connectivity, `viam-server` should stop this robot's session, therefore stopping the flow of power to all actuating resources.

### How do Viam's SDKs work if you lose connectivity during a session?

> As a client of your robot, the Python or TypeScript SDKs will have their connection to the robot stopped when the robot loses connectivity, if the session is ended properly.

Author: This is kind of too vague w/ "ended properly" but i'm not sure how to explain it and not make redundant info from the other sessions page. @dannenberg do you have any suggestions here if this isn't phrased super weirdly or wrong?

---

> title: "Client Sessions and Robot Networking"

Author: ```suggestion
title: "Client Sessions and Robot Network Connectivity"
```

---

> title: "Session Connectivity: Network Disconnection during a Session"

Author: ```suggestion
title: "Client Sessions and Robot Networking"
```

> linkTitle: "Network Disconnection"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
linkTitle: "Network Connectivity Issues"
```

I don't think Disconnection is a noun I've often seen used...

Author: hahaha changed-- I don't think it's too odd but this makes more sense

weight: 20
type: "docs"

> description: "How a Viam robot handles losing its connection to the internet."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Whan a robot loses its connection to the internet, all client session will timeout and end by default."
```
^ this sentence provides a bit of information which is then elaborated on in the text. The current sentence describes what this section covers without providing an answer. I think the former is better

Author: LGTM, implemented-- unfortunately I didn't rename properly with git and can't apply inline but copy/paste applied

> description: "How Viam handles losing connection to the internet during a robot session."

Author: ```suggestion
description: "How a Viam robot handles losing its connection to the internet."
```

tags: ["client", "sdk", "viam-server", "networking", "apis", "robot api", "session"]
---

What happens when your robot loses its connection to the internet over a LAN or WAN and can no longer communicate through [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).

> ### How does `viam-server` work if your robot loses connectivity during a session?

Author: ```suggestion
### How does `viam-server` work if your robot loses its connection to a LAN/WAN during a session?
```
@Otterverse Would this title be an improvement?

- supports stopping moving components when the connection is no longer active.

> ### how does viam-server work if you lose connectivity during a session?

Author: Will be changing this and making these headings a bit more formal when this is not a draft

> What happens when your robot loses its connection to the internet over a LAN or WAN and can no longer communicate with clients through [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
> 
> ## How does `viam-server` work if your robot loses its network connection?
> 
> If the robot loses its connection to the internet, `viam-server` will timeout and end any current client [*sessions*](/program/apis/sessions/) on this robot.

Reviewer: Try not to start sentences with interrogative words - it somewhat describes the content but it is not an introduction to the topic. How about this:

```suggestion
When a robot loses its connection over LAN or WAN, it can no longer communicate with clients through [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
`viam-server` will timeout and end any current client [*sessions*](/program/apis/sessions/) on this robot.

```

Author: Added!

Author: Made one change-- added `SessionsClient will end` because I believe that API is doing the pruning not `viam-server`, @Otterverse should probably fact-check

Reviewer: Can you ask him on that

Reviewer 2: To clarify, sessions are tracked in viam-server itself. When the client connection is interrupted/disconnected, the client is no longer able to to send heartbeats. The viam-server will end the session after a timeout period where no heartbeat is received, it then cancels operations that belong to that session.

Author: Ok, thank you so much for the explanation, will change to @npentrel suggestion -- sorry for the confusion

> If the robot loses connectivity, `viam-server` will timeout and end any current client [*sessions*](/program/apis/sessions/) on this robot.

Author: ```suggestion
If the robot loses its connection to the internet, `viam-server` will timeout and end any current client [*sessions*](/program/apis/sessions/) on this robot.
```

Any active commands will be cancelled, stopping any moving parts, and no new commands will be able to reach the robot until the connection is restored.

> ### How will your robot's primary parts and sub parts work if you lose connectivity during a session?

Author: ```suggestion
### How will your robot's primary parts and sub parts communicate if network connectivity is interrupted?
```

When its session times out, each client is asked to cancel any ongoing operations by the automatically-configured `SessionsClient` of your robot. 

> Any active commands will be cancelled, stopping any moving parts, and no new commands will be able to reach the robot until the connection is restored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What happens to clients connected to the robot when your robot loses its network connection?

When your client cannot connect to your robot's `viam-server` instance, all client operations will timeout automatically and halt.
Any active commands will be cancelled, stopping any moving parts, and no new commands will be able to reach the robot until the connection is restored.
```

- I think a heading of "how does X work" doesn't make sense when we're describing a scenario where you could say it doesn't work - it's more like "what happens to X when"
- "When its session times out, each client is asked to cancel any ongoing operations by the automatically-configured `SessionsClient` of your robot." -> this is what happens on the server side, i.e. on the robot right? So it should move to the first part?
- giving an example of a client operation would be a good idea I think.

Author: Applied, thank you so much for the really good suggestions ⭐

> Resources on the robot will still be able to send operations requests to each other if your robot running `viam-server` is no longer connected to the internet and the session is ended, but all operations will timeout automatically and cancel if network connectivity is not re-established under the management of the `SessionsClient`.

Author: @Otterverse reworked line 20 a lot but I'm not sure about the immediacy of session end-- is it more accurate currently or is the below suggestion correct? 

```suggestion
Resources on the robot will still be able to send operations requests to each other if your robot running `viam-server` is no longer connected to the internet and the session is ended, but all operations will timeout automatically and operations will be halted.
```

As a client of your robot, the Python or TypeScript SDKs will have their connection to the robot stopped when the robot loses connectivity, if the session is ended properly.
Client implementation is necessary to make this work.

### how the primary parts and sub parts work if you lose connectivity during a session?

Resources on the robot will no longer be connected and signaling to each other if you lose connectivity and the session is ended.
If opting to manage sessions yourself with the session management API, you must make sure the topographical hierachy of resources is respected when shutting down resources at session end.

> This means that sub-parts signal their shutdown to the primary part, which then closes the connection to accessing clients like SDKs.

Author: ```suggestion
This means that you must ensure your sub-parts signal their shutdown to the primary part, which will then close the connection to accessing clients like SDKs.
```

Author: tense is weird on this one but i'm not sure what'd be best

Reviewer 2: Sub-parts don't signal shutdown, as far as I know. Rather the session manager of the main part (that the client session is connected to) would send Stop() commands to the various resources. Again, I think there might be some conflation between "robot shutdown" and "end of session" here.

Author: ok agreed will try to rephrase, will comment once this is addressed

Author: Am confused here-- can I keep this in or is inaccurate? Tried to add more in earlier to un-conflate, but slightly unsure what to do here

Reviewer 2: When a session ends, any in-progress actions are cancelled, generally causing all actuators to stop moving, typically by calling Stop(). This has nothing to do with topology or configuration. It's simply a way to make sure the robot doesn't keep driving/moving if the client connection (the thing sending commands) is lost.

During robot shutdown is where topographical ordering matters. A Close() is called on each part in the graph, starting from the "leaf" node resources (those with no dependencies) and working their way up to the robot itself. This shouldn't be related at all to just a network disconnection.

I don't think there's any need to talk about shutdown here, if you're only trying to document network disconnection behavior.

---
title: "Session Connectivity: Network Disconnection during a Session"
linkTitle: "Network Disconnection"
weight: 20
type: "docs"
description: "How Viam handles losing connection to the internet during a robot session."
tags: ["client", "sdk", "viam-server", "networking", "apis", "robot api", "session"]
---

What happens when your robot loses its connection to the internet over a LAN or WAN and can no longer communicate through [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).

### How does `viam-server` work if your robot loses connectivity during a session?

If the robot loses connectivity, `viam-server` will timeout and end any current client [*sessions*](/program/apis/sessions/) on this robot.

> When its session times out, each client is asked to time-out of any ongoing operations by the automatically-configured `SessionsClient` of your robot. 

Author: ```suggestion
When its session times out, each client is asked to cancel any ongoing operations by the automatically-configured `SessionsClient` of your robot. 
```

Any active commands will be cancelled, stopping any moving parts, and no new commands will be able to reach the robot until the connection is restored.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

---
title: "Session Connectivity: Network Disconnection during a Session"
linkTitle: "Network Disconnection"
weight: 20
type: "docs"
description: "How Viam handles losing connection to the internet during a robot session."
tags: ["client", "sdk", "viam-server", "networking", "apis", "robot api", "session"]
---

A guide to what happens when your robot loses its network connection during a session.

### How does `viam-server` work if you lose connectivity during a session?

> If you lose connectivity, `viam-server` will by default timeout all resource and end this robot's [*session*](/program/apis/sessions/), therefore stopping the flow of power to all actuating resources.

Author: ```suggestion
If you lose connectivity, `viam-server` will by default timeout all resource and end this robot's [*session*](/program/apis/sessions/). 
This does not immediately stop the flow of power to all actuating resources, but it signals that the robot can no longer receive operations over the internet, so any further operations will not be performed.
```

> If you lose connectivity, `viam-server` will by default timeout all resource and end this robot's [*session*](/program/apis/sessions/), therefore stopping the flow of power to all actuating resources.

Author: Ok, tried to address, lmk what you think/if still inaccurate @Otterverse Thank you so much for your detailed review!

This is because the robot cannot access Viam's APIs, including the robot API, without a connection to the cloud.

To disable the default behavior here and manage resource timeout and reconfiguration over a networking session yourself, follow [these instructions](/program/apis/sessions/) to [disable the default behavior](/program/apis/sessions/#disable-default-session-management) of session management, then utilize [Viam's SDKs](/program/) in your code to make calls to [the session management API](https://pkg.go.dev/go.viam.com/rdk/session#hdr-API).
If you do this, and configure the primary and sub-parts of your robot to cache all tokens so that authentication to Viam's cloud is not required for operation-related communication over the local network or directly through `viam-server`, you can operate your robot consistently without the need for a network connection.
However, the low-network approach is not recommended if you want to utilize any of Viam's [services](/services/), like the vision service, motion planning, or the frame system.

### How do Viam's SDKs work if you lose connectivity during a session?

> As a client of your robot, the Python or TypeScript SDKs will have their connection to the robot stopped when the robot loses connectivity, if the session is ended properly.

Author: @Otterverse updated, lmk if you think this can help-- I think it's what you mean?

> If you wish to implement your own client SDK, note that client implementation of session management is necessary to make this work.

Author: Fair enough 🤣

> If you wish to implement your own client SDK, note that client implementation of session management is necessary to make this work.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> The Go Client SDK is a little bit different: as the session management API is implemented through the Go Client, the session can be managed from within this client, allowing for more flexibility in timing disconnection.

Reviewer 2: How and where? I presume this is meaning the stuff documented here: https://pkg.go.dev/go.viam.com/rdk/session but it's not clear.

Author: I meant docs on Viam docs that I made from there--linking now, thank you for pointing this out!

Author: Linked

Reviewer 2: Where? I don't see any link to the URL I suggested.

Author: Not to there, to the docs about it! On line 27. Do you want to link to those rdk docs as well? The linked page links to them, but if you think it'd be helpful, happy to include a separate link to RDK sessions management docs

Reviewer 2: But in context of the previous sentence, (which says the cloud connection will be stopped, which is also not really true) this implies that somehow the go SDK can avoid cloud disconnection. That's not really what the custom session management does though (again, beacuse the cloud isn't involved explicitly.)

> The Go Client SDK is a little bit different: as the session management API is implemented through the Go Client, the session can be managed from within this client, allowing for more flexibility in timing disconnection.

Author: ```suggestion
The Go Client SDK is a little bit different: as the session management API is implemented through the Go Client, the session can be managed from within this client, allowing for more flexibility in timing disconnection.
Follow [these instructions](/program/apis/sessions/#use-the-session-management-api-to-manually-manage-sessions) to enable this manual session management.
```

### How will your robot's primary parts and sub parts work if you lose connectivity during a session?

> Resources on the robot will no longer be connected and signaling to each other if you lose connectivity and the session is ended.

Reviewer 2: This is not true. The CLIENT (aka "you") may be disconnected from the resource, but that doesn't mean resources that depend on other resources are disconnected from each other at all.

Author: Ok tried to make better, I was confused-- LMK if still inaccurate @Otterverse

> If opting to manage sessions yourself with the session management API, you must make sure the topographical hierachy of resources is respected when shutting down resources at session end.

Reviewer 2: Session end is an entirely different event from actual shutdown of the robot parts. I think this is conflating the two.

---
title: "Session Connectivity: Network Disconnection during a Session"
linkTitle: "Network Disconnection"
weight: 20
type: "docs"
description: "How Viam handles losing connection to the internet during a robot session."
tags: ["client", "sdk", "viam-server", "networking", "apis", "robot api", "session"]
---

What happens when your robot loses its connection to the internet and can no longer talk to the Viam cloud through [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).

> ### How does `viam-server` work if you lose connectivity during a session?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### How does `viam-server` work if your robot loses connectivity during a session?
```

> If you lose connectivity, `viam-server` will by default timeout all resource and end this robot's [*session*](/program/apis/sessions/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the robot loses connectivity, `viam-server` will timeout and end any client [*sessions*](/program/apis/sessions/) on this robot.
```

Author: Adding!

> If you lose connectivity, `viam-server` will by default timeout all resource and end this robot's [*session*](/program/apis/sessions/). 

Author: ```suggestion
If you lose connectivity, `viam-server` will by default timeout all resource and end this robot's [*session*](/program/apis/sessions/).
```

> This does not immediately stop the flow of power to all actuating resources, but it signals that the robot can no longer receive operations over the internet, so any further operations will not be performed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a session times out, any active commands will be cancelled, stopping any moving parts, and no new commands will be able to reach the robot until the connection is restored.
```

> This is because the robot cannot access Viam's APIs, including the robot API, without a connection to the cloud.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> This is because the robot cannot access Viam's APIs, including the robot API, without a connection to the cloud.

Author: ```suggestion
This is because the robot cannot access Viam's APIs, including the robot API, without a connection to the cloud, and receive any more requests for operations to be performed.
```
Ok-- I might not get it, but is this better?

Reviewer 2: No, I was more suggesting remove this line entirely.

Author: @Otterverse Ok that's good w me, removed

To disable the default behavior here and manage resource timeout and reconfiguration over a networking session yourself, follow [these instructions](/program/apis/sessions/) to [disable the default behavior](/program/apis/sessions/#disable-default-session-management) of session management, then utilize [Viam's SDKs](/program/) in your code to make calls to [the session management API](https://pkg.go.dev/go.viam.com/rdk/session#hdr-API).
If you do this, and configure the primary and sub-parts of your robot to cache all tokens so that authentication to Viam's cloud is not required for operation-related communication over the local network or directly through `viam-server`, you can operate your robot consistently without the need for a network connection.
However, the low-network approach is not recommended if you want to utilize any of Viam's [services](/services/), like the vision service, motion planning, or the frame system.

> ### How do Viam's SDKs work if you lose connectivity during a session?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### How do Viam's client SDKs work if you lose connectivity during a session?
```

Reviewer 2: Again, what is "you" here? Is it the client, or the robot?

Author: It's a user reading-- we've been using you a lot in our docs to just talk to the reader. I can see how that introduces confusion here, though. Changing to "your robot" as I believe that is the intended use case

> As a client of your robot, the Python or TypeScript SDKs will have their connection to the Viam cloud and Viam app stopped when the robot loses its internet connection, if the session is ended properly.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure that's true. The client might ONLY have a connection to the robot at this point. The cloud may or may not be involved at all.

Author: Ok-- verging on deleting this section, would you recommend? Or could a refactor still be useful? If I still included I would say/replace with the converse-- `will NOT have their connection stopped`

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure that's any clearer.

There's really only one thing ALL of this seems to be saying: If the connection between a client and a robot is disconnected, client sessions on that robot halt in progress operations, and (somewhat obviously) the client can't send new commands until that connection is reestablished.

The cloud isn't involved, so doesn't need to be mentioned. So yeah, probably in favor of just removing this.

The Go Client SDK is a little bit different: as the session management API is implemented through the Go Client, the session can be managed from within this client, allowing for more flexibility in timing disconnection.
Follow [these instructions](/program/apis/sessions/#use-the-session-management-api-to-manually-manage-sessions) to enable this manual session management.

### How will your robot's primary parts and sub parts work if you lose connectivity during a session?

> Resources on the robot will still be connected and signaling to each other if your robot running `viam-server` is no longer connected to the internet and the session is ended, but they will not be connected to the Viam cloud and Viam app.

Reviewer 2: This is unclear. Again, WHAT connection is being lost here. If you're talking about resources WITHIN a robot (part), they can continue to siginal each other (e.g. a base can still control a motor) but if you mean between a main part and a sub part, then it depends on what connection was lost. If the connection to those sub parts is list, it's different than if only the incoming client connection is lost.

> If opting to manage sessions yourself with the session management API, you must make sure the topographical hierachy of resources is respected when shutting down resources at session end.

Author: ```suggestion
If opting to manage sessions yourself with the session management API,  make sure the topographical hierachy of resources is respected when shutting down the operations of the clients of your robot.
```

@Otterverse Does this address your comment on line 32 or should I remove this section entirely to avoid conflation?

weight: 20
type: "docs"
description: "How Viam handles losing connection to the internet during a robot session."
tags: ["client", "sdk", "viam-server", "networking", "apis", "robot api", "session"]
---

What happens when your robot loses its connection to the internet and can no longer talk to the Viam cloud through [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).

### How does `viam-server` work if your robot loses connectivity during a session?

If the robot loses connectivity, `viam-server` will timeout and end any client [*sessions*](/program/apis/sessions/) on this robot.
When a session times out, any active commands will be cancelled, stopping any moving parts, and no new commands will be able to reach the robot until the connection is restored.

To disable the default behavior here and manage resource timeout and reconfiguration over a networking session yourself, follow [these instructions](/program/apis/sessions/).
[Disable the default behavior](/program/apis/sessions/#disable-default-session-management) of session management, then utilize [Viam's SDKs](/program/) in your code to make calls to [the session management API](https://pkg.go.dev/go.viam.com/rdk/session#hdr-API).

> If you do this, you can manage the network operations of your robot manually, and operate your robot without the need for a consistent network connection.

Reviewer 2: I still think remove. Operating your robot when it goes down doesn't require you to disable the default session handling, rather it means that whatever client IS operating the robot has to still have contact with the robot.

> However, the low-network approach is not recommended if you want to utilize any of Viam's [services](/services/), like the vision service, motion planning, or the frame system.

Reviewer 2: This line probably needs to be removed if the above line is as well. Unless you want to completely rethink this and explain how to configure non-cloud connected robots (but I think it was decided that was out of scope for this page.)

---
title: "Session Connectivity: Network Disconnection during a Session"
linkTitle: "Network Disconnection"
weight: 20
type: "docs"
description: "How Viam handles losing connection to the internet during a robot session."
tags: ["client", "sdk", "viam-server", "networking", "apis", "robot api", "session"]
---

What happens when your robot loses its connection to the internet and can no longer talk to the Viam cloud through [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).

### How does `viam-server` work if your robot loses connectivity during a session?

If the robot loses connectivity, `viam-server` will timeout and end any client [*sessions*](/program/apis/sessions/) on this robot.
When a session times out, any active commands will be cancelled, stopping any moving parts, and no new commands will be able to reach the robot until the connection is restored.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

If you do this, you can manage the network operations of your robot manually, and operate your robot without the need for a consistent network connection.
However, the low-network approach is not recommended if you want to utilize any of Viam's [services](/services/), like the vision service, motion planning, or the frame system.

### How do Viam's client SDKs work if your robot loses connectivity during a session?

As a client of your robot, the Python or TypeScript SDKs will have their connection to the Viam cloud and Viam app stopped when the robot loses its internet connection, if the session is ended properly.
The Go Client SDK is a little bit different: as the session management API is implemented through the Go Client, the session can be managed from within this client, allowing for more flexibility in timing disconnection.

Follow [these instructions](/program/apis/sessions/#use-the-session-management-api-to-manually-manage-sessions) to enable the manual session management.

### How will your robot's primary parts and sub parts work if you lose connectivity during a session?

> Resources on the robot will still be connected and signaling to each other if your robot running `viam-server` is no longer connected to the internet and the session is ended, but they will not be connected to the Viam cloud and Viam app.

Author: ```suggestion
The sub-parts of the robot will still be able to send operation requests to each other on a local network or directly (through the primary part) if your robot running `viam-server` is no longer connected to the internet and the session is ended, but they will not be connected to the Viam cloud and Viam app.
Because of the lack of connection to the cloud, they can no longer communicate with any of Viam's services, or interface with the app and appear as connected online.
```
@Otterverse That makes sense, but I don't know how to phrase this better or if I should expand this section. Would this suggestion help clarify/would this be accurate? My apologies if I'm still confused 🤣

Reviewer 2: The section title may be the problem. If you want to talk about inter-part communication, then probably title the section as being about what happens if connections BETWEEN parts are lost. Otherwise, if those connections aren't lost, (only the incoming client connection for the robot itself) then the behavior is just the same as the previous section. E.g. sessions timeout, operations are halted.

If opting to manage sessions yourself with the session management API, you must make sure the topographical hierachy of resources is respected when your robot signals to its clients that the session is over.

> This means that the sub-parts of your robot should signal their shutdown to the primary part, which should then close the connection to any accessing clients like Viam's SDKs or modular resources.

Reviewer 2: No, there's no "signaling" about network status involved. If a part is disconnected from the main part, it can't signal anything, as that connection is literally now gone. If just the client was disconnected from the entire robot, then sessions end as normal.
